摘要


近年来，随着移动设备飞快普及与硬件存储、计算能力的飞快提升，每天都有海量的轨迹数和带地点标签的签到数据以惊人的速度产生。高效地对这些数据进行表征和挖掘，将在现有的经济、环境、交通等领域中产生巨大的效益。因此，结合社交网络进行POI推荐(Point-of-Interest recommendation in Location-Based Social Networks)问题成了一个重要的问题。解决好这个推荐问题，将使得人们的生活得到极大的提升，也能为不同规模的商业经济带来巨大的效益。在本文中，我将首先对国际上主流的在LBSNs中进行POI推荐的算法做一个简短的综述，将现有的模型分为四类：（1）基于签到数据的纯POI推荐。（2）考虑地理因素的POI推荐。（3）考虑社交网络的POI推荐。（4）考虑时间影响的POI推荐。我将分别列举每类推荐算法中经典的例子，详述其工作原理，并指出这些模型共有的问题和缺陷：（a）由于涉及到时空的原始轨迹数据通常有着长度不固定、采样率不固定等天生的缺陷，虽然各种研究方法分别基于自己的假设提出了很多独立的轨迹特征提取以及预处理手段，但在富含多源语义的各种应用场景下，这些方法在表征轨迹的时候都只考虑了轨迹数据的单反面或少数方面信息，没有将多源信息有机地结合起来。（b）作为影响POI推荐正确率程度最大的地理因素，几乎所有方法都将POI的位置信息视为一个平面上的点，忽略了地点是有层次结构的，一个POI隶属于一个区，一个区，一个城市，不同层次的地理结构给POI带来的影响应该分别考虑。（c）另外，由于作为辅助的社交网络数据、地理数据以及时间数据本身也存在稀疏、有噪声等缺陷，使得用它们来增强推荐系统的有效性和准确性都将受到限制。最后，我将对四类模型做出总结性归纳，针对以上提出的问题，指出在LSBNs中进行POI推荐的未来方向，并基于此提出我在本次毕业设计工作中解决问题的思路。





Abstract

With the rapid growing of mobile devices as well as the storage capability and computation capability, the trajectory data and location-based check in data are mounting in a dazzling speed. To leverage these data can benefit fields ranged from economy, ecology to transportation and so on. There are a myriad of spatial-temporal data representation and knowledge mining tasks emerged both in academia and industry. Point-of-Interest (POI) recommendation in Location-Based Social Networks (LBSNs) is a prominent problem that call for attentions, since well tackled this problem will bring significant improvement to human daily life and help LBSNs server providers to increase revenues. Differing from traditional recommender systems, POI recommender systems have some unique characteristics. In this paper, I present a review of existing POI recommendation algorithms and discuss some research directions for POIs recommendation. According to the type of additional information integrated with check-in data by POI recommendation algorithms, I classify POI recommendation algorithms into four categories: pure check-in data based POI recommendation approaches, geographical influence enhanced POI recommendation approaches, social influence enhanced POI recommendation approaches and temporal influence enhanced POI recommendation approaches.

(1) Pure check-in data based POI recommendation. Traditional recommender systems make recommendations by exploiting explicit ratings for items, which are not available in LBSNs. However, the frequencies of check-in recorded by LBSNs implicitly reflect users’ preferences for POI. Hence, in order to produce POI recommendations, several studies adopted traditional recommendation algorithms to infer users’ personalized tastes for POI by mining the check-in patterns of users. And those methods can be generally divided as Item-based and User-based POI recommendation. The former assumes that similar users have similar tastes for locations and makes POI recommendations based on the opinions of most similar neighbors. On the other hand, item-based POI recommendation approach assumes that users are interested in similar POIs.
(2) Geographical influence enhanced POI recommendation. In LBSNs, there are physical interactions between users and POIs, which is a unique property distinguishing POI recommendation from traditional item recommendation. Moreover, the Tobler’s First Law of Geography reported that “Everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related than distant things” (Tobler 1970). The Tobler’s First Law of Geography is also represented as geo- graphical clustering phenomenon in users’ check-in activities. Two intuitions contribute this phenomenon: 1) users prefer to visit nearby POIs rather than distant ones; 2) users may be interested in POIs surrounded a POI that users prefer. Several studies argue that geographical clustering phenomenon in users’ check-in activities, known as geographical influence, can be utilized to improve the POI recommender systems.
(3) Social influence enhanced POI recommendation. Social influence enhanced recommendation approaches have been extensively explored in traditional recommender systems, include memory-based methods and model-based methods. Inspired by the assumption that friends of LBSNs share more common interests than non-friends, several POI recommendation approaches improve the quality of recommendation by taking social influence into consideration. Although social influence shows an important impact on the performance of traditional recommender system, the experimental results of above mentioned social influence enhanced POI recommendation approaches show that social influence weights litter than geographical influence and check-in activities.
(4) Temporal influence enhanced POI Recommendation. There exists studies that consider temporal influence in traditional recommender systems, such as matrix factorization based approach, random walk based approach. However, in traditional recommendation systems, temporal influence is used to as a factor that decays the weights of ratings. On the contrary, POI recommendation systems generally use temporal influence to make POI recommendation for a specific temporal state. 

The common issues and disadvantages of these models are listed, which included but not limited to following points: (a) The trajectory data and other spatial-temporal data are naturally faulty duo to the non-fixed length, volatile sampling rate and other factors. Although the existing methods have proposed many feature extraction and pre-processing models to tackle those drawbacks, almost all of them only considered one or few aspects of rich semantic information of spatial-temporal data, which in turn leads to a bunch of non-thoughtful trajectory representation frameworks. (b) Geographical information takes the leader part in enhancing the performance of POI recommendation. However, almost all methods consider POIs as sole points on a flat space, which is not sensible since there is a hierarchical structure existing in geographical space, i.e. each POI belongs to a street, a region and a city. When recommending POIs to user, the hierarchical structure should be taken into account. (c) Besides, the data from social network, geographical statistics and temporal side may suffer from sparsity and noisy, which will limit the effectiveness and accuracy when the data are considered in POI recommendation.

After summarized these issues, some promising directions are listed, First, in LBSNs, the frequencies of check-in for POIs vary dramatically and users’ check- in frequency intuitively reflects the degree of users’ preferences for POIs, and Rank-based collaborative filtering approaches may be applicable to POI recommendation since rank-based collaborative filtering approaches infer users’ preferences from pairwise comparisons rather than numerical ratings. Second, since users often involve several social networks, information derived from other social networks would be beneficial for POI recommendation in LBSNs. In this case, POI recommendation based on transfer learning is a potential research direction. Third, LBSNs provide rich additional information for enhancing the performance of POI recommender systems, i.e. check-ins, geographical information, social relationships and temporal information. A unified recommendation framework is desirable for POI recommender systems to boost the performance of POI recommender systems by joint all kinds of additional information. Finally, As the rapidly growing amount of users and POIs available in LBSNs, POI recommender systems suffer seriously from scalability problem. Hence, parallelized computing methods, e.g. MapReduce and Spark, are worthy of exploiting to speed up the computation process of POI recommendation. Following those directions, I will propose several models to conduct POI recommendation and complete my graduate project.

